## Chapter 0. Introduction

In this book, I'll be explaining various concepts from spiritual
traditions from all over the world in a language that's understandable
by professional software engineers. Yeah, that's it, that's the idea.

What you'll do with all that knowledge is literally none of my
business, I'm not going to promote any particular "righteous way of
living," I definitely won't be endorsing any particular organisations,
and there was a lengthier disclaimer in an early draft, but Claude AI
told me to throw it away because it was horrible.

Now, as we've all seen many times, there's a common trope in the books
in this genre. It's when the author goes, like, I was in the village of
emerald miners, about halfway between Kathmandu and Ulaanbaatar, and
that's where I met Saint Haregandjah Ramakrishna, who, after we
ingested the Seeds of the Sacred Pumpkin, initiated me to Ancient
Secrets, some of which I'll share with you.

I won't be doing any of that either. In fact, I'm a depressingly normal
bloke. I live in a middle-class loft near Amsterdam Centraal station,
and I work in FinTech. I don't belong to any specific lineages, I
didn't undergo any flashy initiation rituals, and my drugs of choice
are Cortado and Carmenere.

Oh, and also, my regular psychedelic ritual begins with firing up a
Haskell REPL, but let's not get ahead of ourselves.

All I did was I discovered Tao te Ching and the Gospels while in my
teens, and then I spent the next twenty years figuring out what do they
actually mean, and how to make use of them in my life... Oh, mind you,
when I say "twenty years," I don't mean I spent all that time sitting
on my bum in a remote monastery meditating. It was parallel to (and,
really, intertwined with) everything else that was happening in my
life, like getting my engineering degree, having a modestly successful
career, and generally enjoying my 20s and 30s.

That's why on several occasions I've been told it'd be so nice if I
could quietly leave the dinner table and never call them again. When a
talk about things like inner freedom or unity with the Universe comes
from a dirty hippie with metre-long dreadlocks who has been non-stop
high for years, that's very convenient to ignore.

Whereas, when it comes from a bloke in a Hilfiger jumper who smells
Dior and earns six digits, it sometimes hurts...

Anyway, enough of these introductory courtesies. Let's go to the first
chapter, where I'll explain what this book is really about.

