## Chapter 1. Scope

To clarify the scope of this text, let me first elaborate on what I
don't mean when I'm talking about the spiritual.

First of all, I'm not talking about a purely intellectual pastime when
you sit in a comfy armchair and philosophise about the true nature of
Buddha, or whatnot. Some 80% or 90% of what I'd call "spirituality" is
practice, such as meditation, asanas, prayers, integrating the insights
into daily life, and so on.

It's a bit like, imagine climbing a mountain. An instructor can sketch
you a route, and warn you about the obstacles, and share some anecdotes
from the famous climbers. Which is super-important because without this
knowledge, there's a good chance you'd get stuck in a dead end or fall
into an abyss. But nobody can teleport you to the summit, and nobody
can climb the mountain for you. You'll have to do it yourself. And, if
you're writing computer code for a living, this whole mountaineering
metaphor might give you an eerie feeling.

I mean, if you had to describe the most cringeworthy technical
conversations that you've ever had, what would they be? For me, it
would be those where the other side implied that theory is the only
thing that really matters, and, once you learn it, practice is trivial.
Like, use this framework or apply that pattern or "just make it
simple," and it would automagically make everything better. Of course
it will! These ideas were developed by people much smarter than you!
How dare you question them with your puny fifteen years of experience
in the field?!

In the software engineering field, we don't talk about craft and
mastery nearly as much as we should. In part because it's hard and
tedious and much less fun than selling or buying the shiniest silver
bullet of the month. But it matters, and it matters a whole lot.

Theory is important, but it's not hard-hard. I can teach you how to do
the Zazen sitting meditation in fifteen minutes. I can explain the key
refactoring techniques in a few hours and walk you through the GoF
patterns in two days (if we really go into the details)

And look, you definitely must study all that. Reinventing the whole
corpus of engineering (or spiritual) knowledge is a waste of time for a
genius, and way too much to ask for the rest of us. But it will only
prepare you for the journey, it's not the journey itself.

Heck, I can explain long-distance running to you in one sentence. You
put your left foot in front of the right one, then you put your right
foot in front of the left, then you repeat it fifteen thousand times.
That's it, that's all marathon theory that there's to know.

Then it will take you years to practice either of those to mastery. And
that's just how it works.

Second of all, I'm not talking about official religions. Official
religions are... They're pretty good. I've been going to churches
somewhat regularly at various times in my life, and I met wonderful
people there, even though it never really stuck with me.

And yes, I'm confident that most people reading this text identify as
atheists, and would be less generous than I, but hear me out. Official
religions are a bit like the Django framework or like taking Uncle Bob
Martin's commandments at face value. They're useful for certain
purposes and in certain circumstances.

If you have no idea how to define the coding guidelines for your team,
taking Clean Code verbatim is much, much better than unrestrained
freedom of artistic expression. Likewise, if you have no idea how to
structure your webapp, Django's default layout will likely do a better
job than whatever mess you will code yourself into. Besides that, if
you have a department with sixty coders, and you'd rather have a
codebase that's "kinda ugly, but in a uniform way," you can declare
that we use "Django way" here, and be done with bikeshedding.

Like Django, like Spring, like Clean Code, like C++, official religions
are what you end up with when building a platform that works okayish
for a wide population of either coders or churchgoers. So you have to
account for huge variance in skill and commitment, and sometimes trade
off perfection for consistency and "the least surprise." You even get a
similar "language lawyer" archetype who is a deep expert in features
that exist solely to make the whole thing "community-compatible," and
don't hold any inherent value.

So, to make myself clear, I'm neither pro nor against official
religions, as well as Django and Spring frameworks, Clean Code, and
C++. They're merely solving problems that I personally don't have, thus
I have little use for any of these. But I know others who use some of
this very successfully, and I'm truly happy about them.

Oh, and, obviously, if anyone claims that official religions hold a
monopoly on everything spiritual, I strongly disagree, and on this hill
will I die if I must.

Third of all, I'm not talking about tourist destinations when people
get together in glampings to chant mantras, do asanas, dance naked
under the full moon, eat jackfruit stew, and have a good time... All
while this has zero effect on their "normal" life, where they remain
the same angry, thankless people with no idea what they're doing with
their lives. For me, spiritual practice is an integral part of my daily
life, and my daily life is an integral part of my spiritual practice.
And this all also applies to my daily job as an engineer. I'm not
switching modes between me-the-student-of-Zen and
me-the-backend-developer whenever I step into the office elevator. I'm
just being me all the time.

When I'm refactoring a legacy piece of code, I'm just juggling methods
around. And I'm just taking part in Harmony emerging from Chaos.
Without any "not just X but Y" here, as neither of these two sides is
inherently more valuable. Or, better to say, there's no meaningful
comparison of inherent value here.

When I'm mentoring a junior, I'm practising humility and gratitude.
When I'm fixing a flaky CI job, I'm reducing the amount of suffering in
this world. And so on, and so on.

I can easily imagine some of the readers going berserk with cynicism
about this display of flowery idealism. If you're one of them, ask
yourself: what are you trying to protect? Those moments when you sit on
your bum and patiently wait until it's 18:00 and you're permitted to
stand up and do things you actually like? Oh, okay... Sure, you can
have as many of those as you want, fine by me.

In fact, this is where the title of this book comes from. In Zen,
there's a proverb that says, "Before enlightenment, chop wood, carry
water. After enlightenment, chop wood, carry water." Or, to rephrase
for 21st-century coders who don't do much physical labour: before
enlightenment, fix CI, write tests, after enlightenment, fix CI, write
tests. It's perfectly common to undergo a profound inner
transformation, all while your life looks unchanged from the outside.

Anyway, so the plan for this book is I'm going to introduce ideas from
various spiritual traditions, and I will explain how they relate to
engineering practice.

We will start with ones which are... Well, they're not so much
"simpler," but they're easier to grasp with less setup. The first one
is what Zen Buddhists call "Mu."

