## Chapter 2. Mu

If you're a professional software engineer, it's relatively safe to
assume that when you were in your teens, you survived the blunt trauma
of having to go to school. Some of us recovered better from it, some
worse, and this chapter is especially valuable for the latter.

The way it works in school is you're supposed to know the answers. If
you don't know where Timbuktu is located, and you try to weasel your
way out by throwing random guesses and reading the cues, you at least
have some fighting chances. Whereas, if you don't know where Timbuktu
is located, and you honestly admit that, it means you're stupid, and
the whole classroom is now laughing at you.

Some eventually recover from this fear of saying "I don't know." Others
carry it well into their twenties and thirties. I've done something
like a hundred coding interviews over the years, and I've seen far too
many candidates trying to weasel their way out of my favourite puzzles
instead of honestly admitting they don't know.

A more subtle belief, but also much more destructive, is that every
question fundamentally has a definitive answer. If you yourself don't
know it, you're just uninformed - but somebody knows it, or at least
there are means to figure it out.

And that's not true.

In Zen Buddhism, there's a concept of "Mu," which has many different
meanings, and the one important for this chapter is when it's used as a
fixed form to express that the question is garbage.

Mind you, it's not a "get out of jail free" card that allows you to
evade hard questions while also cosplaying a Zen master. It
specifically means: I wish I could give you a definitive answer, and I
did my best to find it, but it simply doesn't exist, and that's because
your question is flawed.

Let me give you an example.

Which language is better, Rust or PHP?

The answer is Mu.

If the question was, given that we want to build such and such systems,
and we have these people in our team, and we have this legacy codebase
we can repurpose, and so on, and so on, then we can draw a comparison
matrix and make an informed choice.

However, when devoid of any context, the question is meaningless.
That's why the answer is Mu.

Next time you get dragged into a debate like that, pay attention.
People will be smuggling the comparison criteria, simply because
there's no other way for this argument to make sense. But then Joe
implies that CPU performance is obviously more important than the ease
of learning, while for Mark it's the other way around, and the two can
be stuck in this argument until the end of eternity.

Let me give you another example.

Say, your team is working on a project, and a realistic ETA with
healthy buffers is twelve weeks. With all non-essential features
descoped today and with extensive reliance on inshallah, you probably
can squeeze it to seven. And now some bigwig from management barges in
and starts asking questions, what can be done to ship by the end of the
month (and it's already the 10th).

The answer is Mu.

You don't have any "constructive" answer. And that's not because you're
there are some magical productivity hacks and pieces of technology that
Proper 100x Engineers would've definitely used, and don't know them
because you're too ignorant and incompetent. That's because, given all
other decisions made so far, three weeks is structurally impossible,
end of conversation.

Or, say, an interviewer asks you if you can recite the algorithm for
rebalancing red-black trees exactly the way it's explained in his
favourite textbook.

The answer is Mu.

And don't get me wrong here. If the question was if you can improvise a
red-black tree using your advanced coding skills, it's an entirely
different question, and the correct answer there starts with "Oh,
that's interesting, let me give it a try."

On the contrary, the ability to recite the textbook is utterly
irrelevant to your engineering ability and experience. That's why the
answer is Mu.

So, there are two key ideas to take away from this chapter. One is that
saying "I don't know" is fine. In school, you have a teacher to
counterbalance you and tell you that, no, silly, Timbuktu is not in
Minnesota. In a professional environment, especially when you're higher
in the hierarchy, it so happens that on Monday, you make something up
to "safe face." And by Friday, half of the company is running on that
claim, and it only goes worse from there.

The second idea is that when you're struggling to find a "definitive,
unambiguous objective answer," it's not always because you're silly or
incompetent.

Sometimes it's because the question is garbage.

In the next chapter, we'll continue our exploration of Buddhism, and we
will examine the concept known as the Middle Way.

