## Chapter 3. The Middle Way

In this chapter, we'll be discussing the Middle Way. It's one of the
core concepts of Buddhism, and it's a rather complex topic. I don't
claim complete understanding of all doctrinal intricacies, but
nonetheless, I'll walk you through the aspects that are relevant for
our craft.

A more basic way to interpret the Middle Way is that if you take a good
idea and you push it to the extreme, it always becomes a bad idea. If,
however, you take a good idea, and push it to the extreme, and get
burned, and then flip around the original idea, and push it to the
opposite extreme... Well, that too always becomes a bad idea.

For example, let's consider third-party libraries. As a general
heuristic, it's usually good to use off-the-shelf components and not
spend your own resources on reinventing something that already exists.
That makes a lot of sense. However. There are many teams out there who
aren't content with mere "don't reinvent the wheel," and so they
elevate it to "random strangers obviously know better, you stupid."

Say you have to choose: spend two weeks to integrate someone else's
work (and download the entire internet as a transitive dependency,
twice) or spend an afternoon to DIY the 5% of features that you
actually need. If you're on that team, there's nothing to discuss.
Random strangers always know better, and your own version will, of
course, be trash. Two weeks to integrate it is.

Also, there are many teams out there that are led by escapees from the
treatment I've just described. They overcompensate for the pain they
endured and declare that everything must be rebuilt in-house. That's
because everything built by the outsiders who don't know the intimate
intricacies of our business is, by definition, subpar and not worthy.
Oh, and Lord have mercy on your soul if your boss ever finds you
copy-pasting swaths of code from public repositories.

Or let's take code review culture. As a rule of thumb, careful code
reviews are very valuable. However, when it's not "careful," but more
of a battle of Agincourt level of intensity, and people fight over
every semicolon, that's not productive. But when the problem of lengthy
reviews is "solved" by just hacking on a production server, and often
not even bothering with version control, that's also not perfect, most
of the time anyway.

Or let's take... I mean, I can go on with such anecdotes forever. And,
if you've been in this industry for a decade or more, you can too. So,
the first takeaway: if you take a good idea and overdo it to the point
of absurdity, then it becomes a bad idea.

However, there's more to the Middle Way than just that.

First, moderation is not a silver bullet in itself. A
middle-of-the-road idea doesn't automagically become good. A bad
compromise is still bad. The middle ground can be the worst of both
worlds.

For instance, this is how many refactoring initiatives go wrong before
they even start. Plenty of those should've been reengineering
initiatives: take your codebase, carve out the good parts, burn the
rest. Then rebuild from scratch using the architecture and the tech
stack that is best for the purpose, rather than one that you're
sentimentally attached to.

Also, plenty of those should not have been done at all. That's because,
despite all the mumblings and grumblings of frustrated coders, the
economics don't work, and productivity gains over the system's lifetime
won't make up for refactoring efforts.

However, it often so happens that there's no will to either shut down
or bump up the project, so the team proceeds with a sequence of local
clean-ups and massages that, at the end, leave everyone involved
confused and disappointed.

At this point, you might ask: if a radical decision is bad, and a
middle-of-the-road one is bad too, maybe no decision at all will do the
magic trick? And the answer is no, it won't. Just remember: moderation
is not a valid excuse for indecision.

Sure, you can avoid committing to any particular coherent set of rules,
and handwave it with "oh, just rely on common sense..." But very soon
you'll learn that there's little common about common sense, and it
varies wildly from one individual to another.

Ultimately, it comes down to what Buddhists call Transcendence of
Duality. In lay terms, and that would be the second key takeaway, it
means you stop obsessing over "how much of X is right?" and take a step
back to ask, "What problem are we really solving here?"

Circling back to code reviews. You don't need-need them. They're merely
means to an end. It could be that what you really need is consistency
and making sure that people can't sneak in code that's obviously bad.
Which is a fine goal, but a much better solution here is to add a
format checker and a linter to your CI pipeline, and stop wasting
precious time on single quotes/double quotes debates for good.

Sometimes you need to take multiple steps back. Your team needs code
reviews because you've got a lot of intricate and fragile code, and you
want to prevent the occasional breakage. But the reason your team has
so much fragile code to begin with is that you regularly add "smart
workarounds" without proper structural support. But, in turn, the
reason you have so many "smart workarounds" is because you're way too
obedient when the product asks, "Can you add this little feature that
such and such client asked about?" and that's the real problem you
should be solving.

In the next chapter, we're going to take a pause from Buddhism and
instead study some wisdom from Roman Catholic theology.

