## Chapter 4. Rigourism

In the previous chapter, we covered the consequences of pushing good
ideas to the extreme. In this one, we'll continue with an adjacent
theme of extreme dedication, and a good way to illustrate it is
rigourism.

Rigourism is a concept in Catholic moral theology. In a nutshell, it
means you must always push for your absolute best...

Actually, let me take a step back here and clarify what exactly we're
talking about. We're not talking about "try your best not to punch
strangers in the face." Actions like stealing things, killing people,
setting houses on fire and such, they're all universally considered
bad, and so they're out of this particular conversation. The question
is really about how far you go with the good acts, such as prayer,
fasting, community service, spreading the word, and so on. That, and
also, how high do you set the bar of "badness." Say, if you're building
software for online gambling, does it make you a sinner by association,
or is it still acceptable?

And the rigourist answer to that is to go hardcore. You must be morally
perfect, regardless of circumstances, consequences, or how hard it is
for you. Anything less than perfection means you're a horrible sinner
and you will burn in hell.

Now, it's crucial to understand that the modern-day Church formally
condemns rigourism as a borderline heresy. Meaning, if a priest notices
this pattern of behaviour among his parishioners, it's his job to pull
them back and tell them to take it easy and not be so overzealous. The
current paradigm is called probabilism. In very simplistic terms, it
means you should strive to do your best, but also keep it reasonable
and sustainable, and pushing beyond that is not encouraged.

This is also a great idea to apply to professional engineering work.

Hard work is good and appreciated. Spending weekends tinkering with an
insignificant module and burning out in the process... That is not good
and, in any healthy environment, is actively discouraged.

Decently clean code is great. Rewriting half of the company to attain
perfection, not so much.

Speaking truth to power is noble. Barking at your bosses at every
meeting until they fire you without you having achieved anything,
that's just silly.

Teaching your colleagues is fantastic. Burning through your goodwill on
petty squabbles until you're "that angry weirdo" that nobody wants to
talk to, make an educated guess.

To add colour to this moralistic conversation, it's worth mentioning
that the primary driving force behind the condemnation of rigourism and
the adoption of a more pragmatic approach was the Jesuit order. Which
is famous for many things, but definitely not a "just take it easy and
chill" stereotype.

In fact, I find it quite peculiar. For the outsiders, Jesuits are scary
figures dressed in all black, inquisition, world conspiracy, all the
good stuff. For the insiders, they're missionaries, educators,
diplomats, chaps who keep things running. A bit like that staff
engineer guy at your previous job who was floating between projects and
solving critical problems nobody realised they had. So in the end, it's
not that surprising they'd value sustainable practicality over
unbending perfectionism.

Anyway, so, as a takeaway, I've got a rule of thumb for you. If you
realise that you're being harsher on yourself (and/or people around
you) than the Jesuits recommend, it might be a good time for you to
spend some time in quiet contemplation and to stop taking yourself so
seriously.

Now, being overly demanding of yourself is bad enough. But it can be
even worse, and for that, let me circle back to that angry weirdo that
nobody wants to talk to. I'm sure you met at least one. I've met, let's
say, more than two, and they all shared this quirky feature. Everybody
else's code was garbage, so code reviews could drag for weeks with one
wave of nitpickery after another. Their own code, on the contrary, was
so perfect that even a fleeting suggestion that there might be a bug in
something they made would guarantee you a lecture about how incompetent
and unprofessional you are.

So, as I said, asking too much of yourself is bad enough. But demanding
perfection from others while also conveniently forgiving your own
shortcomings is much worse, and you must first remove the log from your
own eye, and then you will see clearly to take the speck out of your
brother's eye. That's what the Gospel teaches us.

In the next chapter, we will continue our exploration of Christianity,
and we will examine the Book of Ecclesiastes.

