## Chapter 6. Meditation

In this chapter, I'm about to explain an extremely controversial idea.
Next to it, all the flirting with world religions I've done so far
pales by comparison. It goes against everything they've taught you at
school, at the engineering department, and over the course of your
career.

Well, maybe not you personally, but I'm confident many professional
developers will find it counterintuitive and alienating.

And nonetheless, say it I must.

Ready? Here it goes.

You have to stop thinking, at least for fifteen minutes per day.

Yes, yes, I know. Throughout your time at school, you've been praised
for thinking faster and with fewer mistakes than your peers. Nowadays,
you're paid a nice salary to, essentially, think full-time. And I'm
pretty sure you have a bunch of cerebral hobbies too, so you do a lot
of thinking in your spare time as well. All three of these apply to me
for sure.

That's why a suggestion to stop thinking might sound as disturbing as
one to stop breathing or to chop off the left foot. Absolutely... Well,
unthinkable!

And yet, it is necessary. There are certain... We can also say
"abilities" or "techniques," but let's call them skills for clarity,
and the rest of the book will assume you have them. You don't have to
master those skills to perfection, but you have to be aware that they
exist. Otherwise, certain parts of the later chapters may read like
tales about magic, and there's no way around that.

I know, this might sound a tad like initiation rites woo-woo, but it's
not. In fact, it's an absolutely normal thing in any proper learning.
Take a theoretical physics handbook or course, and it would assume you
know how to solve differential equations decently well. If you're not
good at it, a lot of the material would feel like a magic show when
formulas pop up out of nowhere. Oh, and if you don't know what a
differential equation is, then it would be mostly hieroglyphs and
gibberish. This is what you'd normally expect, and with applied
spirituality, it's not too dissimilar.

Specifically, there are three skills that you'll have to learn: control
of your thoughts, control of your perception, and control of your
emotions. The way to learn each of those three is via meditative
techniques.

Now, to drive the level of woo-woo down a few notches once again, let
me explain to you several key ideas about meditation.

First, if you're a software engineer, I'm pretty sure you're already
familiar with meditation. Your mind might not recognise the name, but
your body certainly knows the feeling. You know the state of flow. You
know the state of deep immersion when your entire attention is focused
on coding or debugging, so that you detach from the world around you.
And you know that this is the state of mind in which you, as a coder,
are happiest and the most productive. Meditation isn't exactly the
same, but it's a very similar trance-like state of consciousness, so
there's really nothing to be sceptical or suspicious about.

Second, the exact choice of technique doesn't matter that much. What
matters is that you're comfortable doing it on a regular basis. You can
do Zazen, you can do Shavasana, you can hike in the forest, you can run
long distances, you can draw mandalas, you can chant "Om Mani Padme
Hum," you can chant "Ave Maria, gratia plena, Dominus tecum," you can
lie on a sofa and listen to psychedelic trance. I've literally tried
all of that, and all of that works.

The only constraint is that the task shouldn't consume too much
attention, so you have enough left to observe what's going on inside
your head. I heard some people saying, "My meditation is driving a
motorbike" or "My meditation is playing computer games," and I'm quite
sceptical about those. But then, what works for you is what works for
you. That is, as long as it works, you know the drill.

If you don't have any preferred technique yet, try Zazen, it's a safe
default choice. Here's how you do it:

Place your buttocks on something comfortable. Ideally, a special
meditation pillow you can find in yoga shops, but a stack of normal
pillows would do just fine. Make your back straight. Arrange your legs
into a pose that feels intuitively comfortable: cross-legged, kneeling,
whatever you can hold for ten to twenty minutes. You can also lie down.
That'll be Shavasana. Close your eyes. If you begin to fall asleep,
that's perfectly fine: get a nap, then continue. Also, if it helps,
keep your eyes open and focus on an object in front of you. Breathe in
for about five or six counts. Hold your breath for about five or six
counts. Breathe out for about five or six counts. Breathe in. Hold your
breath. Breathe out.  Focus on your breath. If random thoughts pop up
in your head, that's perfectly fine. Don't fight them. Gently allow
them to say whatever they want to say. Once they're done, return your
focus to your breath. 

I advise starting with 10-15 minute sessions, and then see how it goes.
For me personally, fifteen minutes is the sweet spot. Less than ten
might be too short to get into a proper mood on a busy day. And above
twenty, it begins to gradually slide into the altered state of
consciousness territory, which isn't something I like to do on a daily
basis. Oh, and when I say "gradually slide," I mean very gradually.
You're not going to get a "magic plants" level of experience by
accident, don't worry about that.

Start small, try it out and see how it works for you.

Third, unlike technique, the exact intent is everything.

I knew people who meditated to look pretty in a lotus pose and have
something to yap at the dinner parties, and they were very successful
at that. I also knew people who meditated to attain Krishna
Consciousness, and they were very successful at that.

With your meditative practice, I advise you to focus on developing
three skills:  control of your thoughts, control of your perception,
and control of your emotions. Let me walk you through these one by one.

Control of your thoughts is what you start to feel pretty early on.

It's not uncommon for people to assume that a person and a person's
thoughts are inseparable. I'm my thoughts, and my thoughts are me.

Except that this is wrong. You can stop thinking, and you won't
disappear into thin air, but you'll remain where you are. You can start
thinking about something intensely unusual, and you won't suddenly grow
a third eye and a second nose, but you'll remain yourself. You can even
ask yourself if you agree with what you think, and it won't be a
dissociative disorder. It would be a perfectly normal process of
inventorying, which concepts you've actually bothered to examine
critically, and which you've just picked up along the way.

Mastering this skill will have bittersweet consequences on your life.
Many people assign outsized importance to trifles like "I think about
cheeseburgers much more often than about paella" or "I think about this
politician much more often than that other politician." Some will even
make them the foundations of their personalities and identities.

Once you learn to notice how hilariously silly that is, it's tough to
unsee.

Control of perception is essentially the ability to be in the moment.
It's when you look at a tree and see a tree. It's when you take a sip
of coffee and taste coffee. It's when you listen to your boss lying to
you, and you hear your boss lying to you.

And no, that's not how people normally function. A person who is not
trained in either meditation, botany, or sketching can maintain
attention on a tree for, maybe, a minute.

Then they'd notice a bird sitting on a branch, and then they'll be
looking at the bird, and they will see the bird, and they won't see the
tree. Or they'd notice a cloud floating behind the tree, and they'll be
looking at a cloud, and they will see the cloud, and they won't see the
tree.

Or they'd notice an aeroplane flying by, and they'll be thinking about
holidays, tropical island, white sand beach, sunset over the ocean and
a few Cuba Libres too many. In no time, they'll be seeing scantily
dressed dancers of their favourite gender, and they won't see the tree.

Or they'd notice they're wasting time, so they'd be embarrassed by
themselves, and rush home to study from a book about habits of very
effective people. Obviously, they won't see the tree.

Some people will take a sip of coffee and taste coffee. Some will take
a sip of coffee and taste validation that they're drinking proper
fairtrade arabica, not supermarket crap.

Some people will hear their boss lying to them, take notice and start
planning measures. Some will take those words at face value because the
alternatives are very uncomfortable.

And to be very clear here, I don't mean to shame any of those people.
What they do is perfectly normal. Perceiving the world as it is 100% of
the time would be very cognitively taxing and inefficient. That's why
we have all that processing machinery that takes the sensory input,
converts it into labels and patterns, and then attaches it to the
knowledge graph of abstract concepts, stereotypes, memories, social
conventions, and Kahneman knows what else. Love it or hate it, this is
how human beings function, you and me included.

And, as long as you stay aware that said machinery exists (control of
thoughts helps a lot with that), and make amends when it takes
egregious shortcuts, you should be fine. Troubles begin when a person
starts to feel proud of how "smart" (and/or how "right") they are. Then
they begin to act as if their opinion on how things are is more
important than how the things actually are, and that's dangerous.

Look, if there's one thing I know for sure, it's that when your idea of
reality is out of touch with reality, there's no conversation to have,
no negotiations to hold, and no consolation to offer. You are wrong,
reality is right, full stop. Reality is always right about what it is,
and you adjust to that.

That's why you have to stay curious, stay humble, and pay attention.
This way, you can continuously micro-adjust your worldview and your
behaviour, rather than stubbornly force your way into one crisis after
another.

And look, this is not some deep ancient esotericism I'm talking about
here. It's literally just the good old control theory, applied to daily
life.

Control of emotions is conceptually similar to control of thoughts,
except it's harder. If I tell you, "stop thinking about a pink rabbit,
start thinking about a blue monkey," that's not too hard. If I instead
tell you, "stop being so afraid of your boss," that'd be a genius idea,
except you have a whole lot of cortisol in your bloodstream, and you
can't just ignore it. You can consciously navigate your behaviour
around it, and even that requires effort and trained skill.

When it comes to control of emotions, there are two somewhat popular
ideas. One of them declares that you have zero control. Basically,
you're like Pavlov's dog, stimuli in, responses out, no conscious
processing in the middle.

So, if you look into the source code of that library you've been
carefully crafting, and you notice that your colleague Joe has
butchered it by throwing a dirty hack in the middle of it, then you're
fully entitled to throw a tantrum. You can go to Joe's desk and scream,
shout, punch, kick, throw coffee mugs and keyboards across the room.
It's all good, you're upset.

Another somewhat popular idea is that you have total control over your
emotions. Basically, you're like a high-level Shaolin monk. So, when
Joe butchers your library, you must quietly appreciate the beauty in
imperfection, and anything less than that means you're not properly
enlightened and a horrible human being.

Needless to say, both these ideas are garbage, and the truth is
somewhere in the middle. In the example above, the proper course of
action is: first, you calm yourself down to a level where you can have
a coherent professional discussion. Second, you have that discussion.
No fight-flight-freeze-fawn shebang, but a confident technical
conversation about which body parts Joe used for thinking that day, and
how to proceed from there.

Don't underestimate your ability to control your own emotional state.
If you don't believe me, just close your eyes, take a deep breath in
through the mouth and out through the nose, and say "I feel kind, I
feel grateful, I feel joyful." Repeat for several minutes. Observe how
you feel. I mean, I'm not saying you'll feel radically different after
three minutes. But there will be a slight change of mood, and you can
experiment with that.

But also don't get me wrong here. All these forms of self-control are
about navigating the external circumstances, not about pretending like
they don't matter. If you have to spend two or three hours every day
commuting, it really helps if you focus on gratitude and joy instead of
annoyance and despair. But it also really helps if you sort out the
work-from-home arrangement.

This is all I've got to say about meditation. In the next chapter, we
will examine the concept that Buddhists call Suffering.

