## Chapter 7. Suffering

Suffering is one of the core Buddhist concepts. The tricky thing about
it is that they repurpose the word from common vocabulary, while
slightly adjusting its meaning, and it takes some time to piece
together what is going on exactly. Let me walk you through.

In Western culture, we commonly see suffering as something imposed on
us from the outside. The world is full of evil people who do terrible
things and make your life awful. Also, the world is full of random shit
that happens and makes your life awful. Besides that, the world is full
of nice things you can't have, which makes your life awful. And then
there are variations and combinations, but pretty much everything can
be traced back to these three categories.

Therefore, we as a society and we as humankind must achieve three
goals. We must eliminate random shit, or at least build a sufficient
safety net and civil infrastructure to neutralise it. We must eliminate
bad people, and we must make nice things available to everyone. Then,
generously assuming we can agree on which nice things are excessive and
which bad people are still redeemable, it will be Heaven on Earth.

And then the Buddha comes in and says no, you're not getting the
perfect world simply by eliminating the external factors. That's
because suffering is an innate feature of human nature, and many people
suffer because of that reason and that reason only.

And let me make one thing very clear here. Some people do suffer
because of the circumstances they find themselves in, and pushing all
the blame back on their "lack of mindful enlightenment" would be very
cruel and stupid. If you go to sleep in a peaceful village and wake up
in the middle of a warzone, that's not "an opportunity to grow," that's
a catastrophe, and every social media "guru" suggesting to "find a
positive side in everything that happens to you" is welcome to trade
places with you and your loved ones.

With that disclaimer written down. Many people do suffer while having
no rational narrative or redeeming reasons to attach to that. Like,
many people just eat junk food. Not because they can't afford proper
nutrition. Not because they're looking forward to having a stroke
shortly after a heart attack. Not even because it tastes better than
the healthy alternatives. They just eat junk food.

In very simple and blunt terms, many people just do shite without a
reason... Wait, let me be more precise here. Many people just do shite
without a rationale or a purpose. If you ask them, hey, how did you
even get into this nasty situation, for sure, there's a story behind
it, always. If, however, you ask, do you really have to stay in this
nasty situation, that's where things tend to get complex.

Now, you might say, okay, that's a fine idea, but does it really apply
to the software development domain you're writing about? We're
developers, which means we're usually better educated, and proudly more
rational, and hopefully a smidgeon smarter than the general population.
We should be safe from harm here, right? Right?!

Well... We have a very particular weakness.

As engineers, we're constantly dealing with sacrifices, tradeoffs, and
compromises. That's why when we see a dubious solution, we're often too
quick to assume that it must have been a product of one. So, it must
have some redeeming advantages, even if you don't see them immediately.
Like, it's difficult to maintain; thus, it must be reliable. Or, it's
hard to understand; therefore, it must be fast. Or, it's slow; hence,
it must be easy to develop. Or something along those lines.

This isn't always true. Some ideas are simply bad across the board.

Sometimes people just use inadequate platforms for their software
systems.

Some people just write functions that span multiple thousands of lines
of code and take twenty arguments for input.

Some people keep maintaining a dozen heavily interconnected
microservices that really should be a single tidy REST endpoint. While
some keep maintaining a bunch of heavily interconnected spreadsheets
and bash scripts that really should be a single neat application.

Some people produce copious unit tests that don't really test anything.
Some copy-paste swaths of code and then painstakingly keep them in
sync. Some obsess about carving microseconds off code that is nowhere
near the critical path.

So, the takeaway for this lesson is: when you see something bad, don't
rush to assume it has some redeeming qualities you simply don't know
yet. Some things are just bad, period.

Now, "bad" is a tricky three-letter word that can trigger a variety of
complex responses. One is the "it's not a bug, it's a feature" denial
we've discussed. The other is to fixate on "how did we even get into
this mess?" with the intention to either find someone to blame for
their lack of perfect foresight, or to find "the last good version"
that you can revert to, or something along those lines.

I mean, don't get me wrong here, "how did we even get into this mess?"
is a great tool to gain situational awareness and to learn what
decisions were made and why. However, more often than not, you'll
discover that this idea / system / process / decision made perfect
sense in the past, but had a "reevaluate a year later" asterisk
attached to it all along, and now it's time to do exactly that.

Typically, aside from trivial situations when everything can be traced
to a singular local mistake, you can't just roll back. Instead, you
must roll forward, and the right questions to ask yourself are:

- How do we get out of this mess?
- What is holding us back?
- Do we even care?

Don't let your perfectionism skip the third question. It can happen
that the piece of software you're looking at is absolutely atrocious,
but also has very limited scope and impact. Then, just let it sit in
its mouldy corner, and look for better problems to solve.

And when it comes to "what is holding us back," prepare to feel
embarrassed. That's because a whole lot of suffering in our domain is
root-caused by nothing else but people getting stuck in a rut and
"doing what they always did" with nobody there to take a step back and
ask questions. When you examine it carefully, you'll find out that a
lot of problems originate from blind spots, lazy thinking, cognitive
inertia, tunnel vision and similar thought distortions.

This is why you have to meditate. As I explained earlier, detaching
from your thoughts and "getting out of your head" is a powerful tool
for spotting lazy thinking, and you'll need it.

Tunnel vision is not the only form of distorted thinking out there,
there are others as well. One peculiar example is ego titillation, and
let me explain what I mean here. When you see a system that is so
complex and convoluted that it takes a superhero genius to navigate it,
look around. Quite likely, there'll be a bunch of those "superhero
geniuses" on the payroll advocating that "this is how things are meant
to be, and you're too incompetent to understand." We'll get back to
handling such social conundrums in later chapters.

So, if the first takeaway is that some systems and processes are bad
for no reason, then the second one is that some systems and processes
remain bad only because nobody bothered to fix them.

And now that we've got a general idea of what Buddhists call suffering,
we can continue with the exploration of one of the major causes of
suffering, which is attachment. That will be the topic of the next
chapter.

